# Lake-Erken-signal-crayfish
Gut microbiome of signal crayfish from Lake Erken, Sweden

This dataset is from an NSF GROW project investigating the gut microbiome of signal crayfish and the influence of crayfish stage, sex, and diet on gut microbial communities.

**Experimental design**

Crayfish were captured using minnow traps and by hand netting individuals while snorkeling. A subset of 80 individuals were frozen at -80°C immediately after capture to characterize gut microbial communities in the field (hereafter referred to as “field crayfish”). The rest (n=100) were transported live to Uppsala University to be used for the laboratory experiment. We recorded crayfish length (carapace length and total length, mm), sex, and reproductive status (visually assessed by searching for the presence of dark eggs in mature females and white sperm masses in mature males; (Yazicioglu & Kozák, 2016). We collected three resource types: algae (Chara sp., average wet mass per sample = 0.059 g), zebra mussels (muscle mass only, average wet mass per individual = 0.165 g), and Chironomidae larvae (average wet mass per individual = 0.001 g) (n=3 samples per resource type). We also sampled water from Lake Erken and laboratory tap water and filtered 500 ml and on Whatman glass microfiber filter (n=3 each water type).  All samples were frozen at -80°C until further processing for microbial community characterization. 
Laboratory crayfish (n = 100) were housed individually in 5L aquaria filled with tap water at the Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. Room temperature was 14°C and the light:dark cycle was set to 14:10 to reflect daylight length late summer. Each tank contained either an adult or juvenile male or female crayfish, which were fed either algae or mussels daily for 4 weeks ad libitum between 23 August and 26 September 2017. Individuals were immediately frozen at -80°C at the end of the experiment. The hindgut of partially defrosted field and laboratory crayfish were dissected using sterile dissection techniques, placed into microcentrifuge tubes, and frozen until further processing. Crayfish that molted during the experiment (n = 5) were not processed since crayfish do not feed after molting until after their carapace has hardened.

**DNA extraction, PCR amplification and sequencing**

DNA was extracted from crayfish hindguts, lake water, tap water, and food items using DNeasy Powersoil (Qiagen, No./ID: 12888-10) following the manufacture’s protocol with an additional incubation at 65°C for 10 min after adding the C1 solution. The hypervariable V4 region of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene was amplified in a two-step PCR using primer pair 515F and 805R (Caporaso et al., 2012; Zha et al., 2018). For the first step, PCRs were performed in triplicate using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, No./ID: F-530XL). 25 cycles were performed following Phusion polymerase protocol. Negative controls were run during DNA extraction and 16S PCR amplification to check for contamination. Triplicate PCR products of each sample were pooled and subsequently purified using AMPure XP magnetic beads for Purification (Beckman Coulter, No./ID: A63882). For the second step, Illumina adaptor sequences and barcodes were attached to the PCR primers to provide each sample a unique identifier. Samples were then purified again using magnetic beads. An equal concentration of DNA from each sample was pooled and run through agarose gel. 400-500 bp band was then excised and purified using the QIAquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen, No./ID: 28104). PCR products were sequenced on IlluminaMiSeq to obtain 250 bp paired-end reads at Science for Life Laboratory (SciLifeLab), Uppsala, Sweden.  

**Sequence preprocessing**

Only samples with 3 successful PCR runs were included in the analysis. Sequences were processed using DADA2 (Callahan et al., 2016), an R package for data quality filtering, paired-end merging, and chimera removal that produces amplicon sequence variants (ASV). ASVs, which are exact amplicon sequences as opposed to clustered sequences based on a threshold, were classified to family using the Ribosomal Database Project 16S rRNA database (release 11.5, Wang et al., 2007). The data are saved as a phyloseq object.

**Phyloseq object**

The object includes the following:
otu_table = otu table; tax_table = taxa table; phy_tree = phylogenetic tree; sam_data = sample metadata

**sam_data column descriptions**

- fast_ID: ID generated by SciLifeLab

- Sample Number: individual sample number

- Collection: samples are either crayfish from Lake Erken ("wild"), crayfish used in the laboratory experiment ("Lab), or environmental samples ("Env")

- Env_type: samples are either crayfish from Lake Erken ("wild"), crayfish used in the laboratory experiment ("Lab), diet items ("Algae", "Chironomid", or "Mussel"), or water samples ("Erken water", "Tap water")

- CL: carapace length (mm)

- TL: total length (mm)

- Sex: Male or Female

- Diet: samples were either crayfish from Lake Erken ("Field") or crayfish used in the laboratory with one of two diet treatments ("Mussel" or "Algae")

- Reproductive: crayfish were either sexually mature ("Yes") or not sexually mature ("No")
  

